Contributing
============

Hello and welcome to your local friendly neighborhood operating system testing!

os-test is a project of the Sortix operating system and wants to provide value
to all POSIX systems as our common testing solution.

This guide will provide you with all the information needed to start
contributing effectively to this project. Sortix is a community project that
strives to be welcoming, fun, inclusive, and generally trying to do better.
Please come join our community and don't hestitate to ask for any help that you
could use.

Community
---------

Joining the IRC chat on <https://irc.sortix.org> is the best way to meet the
community, ask for help, and coordinate development. Please come introduce
yourself and stick around. The developers might not be around at all times, but
they will see your messages when they're back, and you will always get a
response in due time. The chat actually runs on a real Sortix server.

You can also drop an email or open an issue, if you prefer to get in touch in a
more asynchronous and reliable fashion. See the website and git logs for the
email contact information.

Please get in touch if you experience any problems with the community,
developers, or the maintainer. The community has been very small so far, so we
just haven't taken the time to make official policies for conduct yet, but we're
definitely doing it immediately at the first sight of trouble or if anybody
asks. We're in touch with experts on diversity and inclusion as part of the
funding that this project has received, and we will use them and their
resources. You are welcome here if you believe everyone is inherently welcome
and worthy as they are, but not if you are hateful.

Welcome to the Sortix community. :)

Writing Tests
-------------

If you submit small C programs, we're more than happy to run them everywhere for
you, and then provide you with portability information. If you follow the
guidelines provided here, then it's easy for us to add your tests to the os-test
project and provide value to everyone.

The guidelines discussed here are based on years of experience running os-test
on many operating systems, and you should follow them unless you have a good
reason.

os-test is split into suites (which may be further split into subsuites) which
contain tests. Each test is a .c program that is compiled and executed by the
os-test build system. Tests are further sliced per the `/*[FOO]*/` comment,
which indicates what POSIX group or other extension the test applies to.

Adding a new test to a suite is as simple as dropping a .c file into the suite
directory.

Adding a new suite is as simple as making a new directory, creating a README,
creating symbolic links to the appropriate shared makefiles in ../misc,
registering the suite in ../misc/suites.list, making a suite header, and adding
the .c files you want. The suite header should be named `suite.h` for new
suites, and you must avoid using the same name as an existing system header to
avoid collisions. The first line of the README is special, as it contains a short
sentence summary that is included on the front page. You can use markdown from
the second paragraph onwards to add more detail on the suite's formatted html
page.

Suites either use expectation files, or the program exit code. Expectation files
are useful for tests that study platform differences where multiple outcomes are
allowed, when it is interesting to know which outcome happened. Program exit
codes are useful for binary tests that test a standard, where there is only one
allowed outcome.

If the foo suite has a foo.expect directory, then that suite uses expectation
files. The foo/bar.c test passes if the output is identical to any of the
foo.expect/bar{,.posix}.[1-9] files. The .posix part should be used if the
test result is standardized, otherwise it should be omitted to clarify that the
outcome is de-facto allowed per operating system consensus. If it is not known
whether an outcome is good or bad, then use the .unknown part instead, which
makes the test have a neutral outcome that does not punish the operating system.
Ideally we will be able to interpret these outcomes later. A test fails if its
outcome does not match any expectation files, and there is expectation files
for the test.

Otherwise the foo suite uses the program exit code. A passing test must exit 0
and not output anything else to the standard output and error. A failing test
must emit an error message to the standard error and exit non-zero.

If a test exits non-zero, it must output an error message to stderr.

os-test strives to write tests as well as possible, including theoretical or
rare problems, if there is a way to avoid such problems.

Name your tests lowercase preferring hyphens instead of underscores, but use
underscores if the name of the invoked function has underscores. Be systematic.
Systematic naming makes it easier to know how tests are different at a glance.
It is often useful to e.g. name them after the sequence of invoked syscalls.

Each test should only test one thing. If there are multiple things that may go
wrong, then simply copy paste the test to another .c file and edit it slightly.
You can be extremely productive making a dozen variants and finding half a dozen
bugs in edge cases, but you may want to get one variant through code review
first to avoid too much refactoring toil.

Structure your test source files like this:

1. An optional `/*[FOO]*/` comment indicating the option the test belongs to.
2. A mandatory comment explaining the purpose of the test.
3. A blank line.
4. Inclusions of the system headers sorted alphabetically. `<sys/foo.h`>
   headers, if any, go before other headers followed by a blank line, per
   old-school Unix style.
5. A blank line.
6. Include the suite header.
6. A blank line.
7. The actual data and functions for your test and the main function.

Tests should have a top comment that explains what is being tested. Remember
that the users will often find a failing test, click the source code link, and
have no idea what the test is about. Make it easy for them to quickly get up to
speed by adding comments about what is being testing, adding a comment at the
point where a bug might be detected, and cite the standard with what is supposed
to happen at that point. It's worth adding a comment before each section in a
long test, to make it easy to skim the source code and get an overview.

Brevity is important.

The test output is displayed in huge html tables for comparison. Long words and
messages that cannot reasonably be line broken, as well as just long messages
overall, cause the tables to explode in size and makes it harder to have
an overview of the data. If it doesn't need to be said, don't. If there are
multiple things to say in a single test, make multiple tests instead.

Tests must check all return values of functions and handle all possible errors,
including functions that can never fail in practice on reasonable operating
systems, if the function signature technically allows such failures. os-test
will run on upcoming and buggy operating systems, and even the established
operating systems have proven surprisingly buggy in practice. Check every error.

Tests should output messages in a platform neutral manner, using e.g. symbolic
names such as ENOENT instead of the locale-variant 'No such file or directory'.
The testing harness has `<err.h>` compatible functions that will do this and you
should use these functions. Don't use `<err.h>` directly as it is only extremely
portable, but it is not universal, use our version instead. Each error message
should uniquely identify a particular point in the program, for instance using
error messages like `first sigfoo: EINVAL` and `second sigfoo: EINVAL`. Do not
output ABI specific constants and values, but rather use the symbolic names
whenever possible. As an exception, it is allowed to output unexpected values in
an unexpected error case, if formatting abstract values is too inconvenient.

Tests must not leak resources. This rule includes error paths and asynchronous
termination via signals, such as user interrupts and timeouts. As special
exemption, it is allowed to leak files in $TMPDIR upon unexpected signals, but
not normal intended test termination. Users are supposed to set $TMPDIR to a
location where such files can be deleted manually. Prefix temporary files with
os-test, such as `$TMPDIR/os-test.XXXXXX` to make it clear where they came from,
and make it easy to clean up. You may need to make a directory using `mkdtemp`
for full safety in some cases, but that function is not universal, so grab the
boilerplate code from an existing test.

This rule also includes descendant processes, which must eventually terminate if
the initial test process dies. Tests may create sessions, process groups,
psuedoterminals, and it may be complex to properly set up and properly tear down
tests in every possible situation.

If you spawn a child process, wait for its completion and format proper error
messages if it unexpectedly exits non-zero or if it unexpectedly exits on a
signal. Grab the boilerplate code from an existing test.

Race conditions may be unavoidable, in which case a `sleep(1)` call or a
`usleep(100 * 1000)` call may be the best portable solution. Significant
scheduling delays may occur in practice under peak load, and running os-test may
be resource intensive. Tests must strive to not be flaky if at all possible.

Tests may run in parallel. Dynamically allocate resources such as socket ports
and file paths in a way that works if the same test is run multiple times at the
same time per the 'what if two processes do this?' rule. Use tmpfile, mkstemp,
bind to port 0, and other appropriate solutions.

Don't modify data inside the working directory and the os-test directory. Create
temporary files and directories as needed. It is fine to use the os-test
directory and the working directory as read-only data for testing.

Prefer parameterless tests that do not use arguments and the environment
unless required. For instance, those facilities may be required for execve(2)
tests. Less special logic makes it easier to potentially add shared logic later.

Be careful with implementing signal handling correctly. signal() is handy but
its exact `sa_flags` values vary, and using sigaction() directly avoids the
potential variance (such as `SA_RESTART` enabled/disabled) that could affect test
results in some cases. Use a `static volatile sig_atomic_t` variable to see if
the signal handler ran, or be careful to either use async-signal-safe functions
or blocking signals to ensure the signal happens at a particular safe location.
Assigning the signal number to your `volatile sig_atomic_t` variable is a useful
way to avoid the unused parameter warning.

Tests must not hang on reasonably functional operating systems. If at all
possible, write the test so it cannot hang. On some systems, a special timeout
may be required. 1 s or 100 ms delays are encouraged as a middle ground between
potential scheduling delays on tests that are expected to be fast. The alarm
syscall is useful as a portable timeout. Do not add timeouts to tests where no
portable need has been demonstrated, as excessive small timeouts significantly
increases likelihood of flakiness, which is strongly disliked by the os-test
developers. In the near future, we'll probably add a large default fallback
timeout to the test execution, and excessive existing timeouts will complicate
that work. You should avoid SIGALRM for that reason, unless required for the
test.

Tests do not need to be universally portable, but whenever a test concerns a
feature, then it should only use other features that are generally as portable
in practice. E.g. a test for a POSIX 2008 function is allowed to use other
POSIX 2008 functions, if they have become generally universal. On the other
hand, it should not use POSIX 2024 functions, as they are not portable enough
yet. Likewise it should not use non-standard features, although if the
combination is of interest, it can be worth submitting as an additional special
copy of the test. The published os-test data can help you make decisions.

When interpreting results, take care to distinguish your personal opinion from
the language in the official standard. The option comment, the .posix
expectation files, and other formalized data are great ways to establish the
distinction.

Anything you say can and will be tested against you. You have the right to have
a language lawyer present during testing. If you cannot afford a language
lawyer, one will be provided.

The existing coding style is not absolute. Be consistent. If you don't follow
the Sortix coding style, it's fine to use a reasonable K&R or BSD style coding
style. The GNU coding convention is its own punishment. You are encouraged to
indent with tabs instead of spaces. The source code must wrap at 80 columns
whenever possible. Trailing whitespace is not allowed, unless required.

C99 is universal at this point. You can rely on it. C11 is less so.

Test files are meant to be standalone .c files that only uses the (minimal)
suite harness header. This makes it easy to contribute tests and adapt them for
different environments and uses.

os-test is generally write-once code, in the sense that we will accumulate a lot
of tests which are written once, duplicated a lot with slight edits, and
generally requires minimal maintenance. It's still good to write tests that have
good quality and good comments, but there is less need to be maintainable.

Tests should not produce warnings on the -Wall -Wextra level. Note how the build 
system will hide warnings at this time. You may need to compile the tests
manually.

Issues
------

Please report and find all known issues in the official issue tracker:

<https://gitlab.com/sortix/os-test/-/issues>

Issues are continuously triaged and labeled. If you're looking for some great
first issues for your first contribution, see the `contributable` label:

<https://gitlab.com/sortix/os-test/-/issues?state=opened&label_name[]=contributable>

Some issues are marked `needs-investigation` to mark them as tricky and may
require careful non-trivial design work, and there may already be a vision in
mind. You definitely want to talk to us while working on these issues.

Otherwise, the golden rule is to have fun, try out the system, and find some
itches to scratch and see how your personal skills can be best used!

Merge Requests
--------------

Merge requests are more than welcome at
<https://gitlab.com/sortix/os-test/-/merge_requests>.

Please fork the official repository on gitlab to be able to submit MRs and make
sure the project visibility is public, so the developers are able to pull from
your repository.

First identity an issue that you would like to work on. Filing an issue or
talking to the developers on chat early on can help you avoid solving a
non-problem or using the wrong approach.

You will want to add your git fork as an extra remote and usually leave the
origin remote pointing to the upstream repository:

    git remote add username git@gitlab.com:username/os-test.git

Please configure git with your identity:

    git config --global user.name 'Firstname Lastname'
    git config --global user.email 'username@example.com'

Please consider using your real identity, however it is not required. You can be
pseudonymous. All that we ask is that your identity is established in some sense
(such as within our project only) and permanent in the sense that we can contact
you later in the event of problems or disputes and that your email continue to
be valid. We understand and appreciate that different people are exposed to
different levels of risk online with different privacy requirements and desires,
and we only want to make sure we know where our code came from, in order to
respect your copyright and moral rights when you license your contributions to
the project.

Please branch off the main branch for your changes:

    git checkout main
    git pull origin main
    git checkout -b my-feature

Edit the source code as you please with your favorite editor and test the aspect
you wish to test per the Writing Tests section above.

Commit your changes early and often to avoid losing work:

    git commit -a -m 'Add foo test.'

Merge requests should be a singular, perfect commit, so please amend the commit
with follow-up changes instead of submitting a series of work-in-process
commits:

    git commit -a --amend

Commit messages should have a special first line using an imperative verb,
optionally followed by a blank line and additional paragraphs. All lines should
be less than 76 characters wide as a style. Bug-fixes should use the format
`Fix foo.` as a style to make it easy to identify and backport such fixes.

Please include context for your changes, such as why the changes needed to be
made, what was wrong, any non-trivial aspects, and provide an overview of the
changes in the merge request. Unrelated changes should go in separate merge
requests to ease reviews.

The main branch will move ahead during development, and you should occasionally
rebase your branch on main to avoid conflicts with the latest official source
code:

    git checkout main
    git pull origin main
    git checkout my-feature
    git rebase main

If your branch's git history becomes messy and isn't a singular commit, you can
clean it up by rebasing on main, and reseting to main to undo your commit
history but retaining your local files, and then you can recommit your
changes:

    git checkout my-feature
    git rebase main
    git reset main
    git add foo.c
    git commit -a -m 'Add foo(1).'

Alternatively git rebase -i with fixup commits is a powerful workflow.

See the Writing Tests section above to make your change ready for submission.

Push your changes to your branch in your fork when you're ready to submit your
merge request:

   git push username my-branch

Open a merge request on the official gitlab project and ask for your branch to
be merged to the main branch.

Contributions submitted to the Sortix project are implicitly licensed to the
Sortix project by the nature of submitting them as contributions. The license of
the files being contributed to applies, or the ISC license per LICENSE if the
file has no license statement. Contributors are responsible for ascertaining
they have the right to license the contribution.

Though submitted contributions are implicitly licensed to the project, first
time contributors must make a written statement to that effect on the permanent
record, to ensure there are no misunderstandings, e.g.:

    I hereby license my past, current, and future contributions to Sortix under
    the ISC license or the license of the relevant files.

os-test is part of Sortix. Any such statements made previously apply to all
Sortix repositories and projects including os-test.

Do not submit contributions you do not have the rights to submit, and the
project will assume good faith and that you have the rights to all contributions
you submit.

Please be patient and wait for the developers to review your change. Please feel
free to ping the merge request if the developers are inactive for an extended
period, so the contribution doesn't fall through the cracks.

You will receive a mandatory code review before your change is merged. You will
likely receive comments that you will have to address, or explain why your
approach is better. The project developers will determine the suitability for
inclusion into the official project, and generally the person that maintains the
code and does the majority of the work gets to have the final say when resolving
disagreements. This person can be you if you join and take ownership of an area
of the project.

To address the feedback, simply amend the commit on your branch, and force push
it up to your fork:

    git checkout my-branch
    $EDITOR foo.c
    git commit -a --amend
    git push -f username my-branch

Please comment on the merge requests that you have addressed the feedback, and
you will receive another review round soon.

Trivial and safe changes may be merged immediately. However, risky changes may
be subject to additional testing proportional to the complexity and risk.

Please feel free to parallelize your work by possibly working on other merge
requests while waiting on your code review. You should prefer finishing up
existing merge requests with feedback rather than submitting additional merge
requests to avoid overloading the code reviewers.

Your branch will be rebased on main when merged. If you disable the ability for
developers to rebase your branch, you will have to do it yourself.

We're really happy that you chose to contribute to the project. Your
contributions will be available on the os-test website when the lead developer
runs os-test on the lab and publishes the results, which is usually done
occasionally as needed, or upon request.

Hey, if you get three contributions merged, then you can receive a special voice
status on the official IRC channel as a meaningless but fun status symbol to
show that you are one of us now. That makes you a junior contributor. If you
keep up the good work, you'll become a senior contributor and be expected to
help out junior contributors and do code reviews, in order to offload the
maintainer.

It's a community project and we're happy to have you here.
